and you know helping people understand
like what did we learn from Iraq if
anything and I mean I it's just
>> yeah absolutely
>> what a strange time we're living in but
um so as you know on Substack people
join in progress and I'm excited to
really first of all uh Ronin is is a
great person and an incredible reporter
and so I'm really thrilled that he was
willing to hop on this Substack and give
us really preview because we do want
people to go to the New Yorker and read
your entire article which took you how
long to write?
>> A year and a half. And I really
appreciate you're leading with that,
Katie, because we were just talking
before you all came on about the way in
which the media landscape is
increasingly becoming consolidated in
the hands of really powerful tycoons and
businesses with, you know, specialized
interests uh that make the environments
they acquire ultimately inhospitable to
this kind of accountability reporting.
So, it's fewer and fewer spaces and it's
one reason I really respect what you do,
Katie, cuz this enterprise of getting
highquality information directly to
people and what all of you in the chat
are engaged in of like joining arms in a
community of people who care and want to
think critically about what's happening
to their country and the world. Uh, that
matters a lot. And I have a and now
since we're all just spawning all over
everybody, I have a tremendous amount of
respect for David Remnik because you
know um investigative reporting is
expensive and timeconsuming and as Ronan
just said it took Ronin and his
co-author Andrew Morance am I saying
Andrew's last name correctly? a year and
a half to work on this piece about Sam
Alman and uh the head of Open AI and to
really really dig to to come up with a a
good portrait of who this person is who
has really unprecedented power and is
going to change the world as we know it.
So, um, obviously, uh, Ronan Pharaoh,
for everyone who's joining us, is, uh, a
a reporter for the New Yorker, and he
and Andrew pulled the curtain, uh, open
on Open AI and Sam Alman, and some
questions about his leadership, his
personality, his ethics um, and and
morality really when it comes to this
whole enterprise. Um, you know, before
we before we talk specific, well, this
is specifically about him, Ronan, but
but where is Sam Alman in the pantheon
of AI of the world of AI? I think, you
know, some people may be very familiar
with him, some less so. So, how would
you describe his position in this brave
new world? Well, he and Open AAI really
are the market leaders still and there's
stiff competition, a competing firm
where actually we tell the story of how
some of these same concerns about
Altman's trustworthiness and the
sincerity of his commitments to keeping
this technology safe fed into a rift
with one of his colleagues Daario Amode
who was there at the company early on
and they created Anthropic which is now
also a major player. Um, so there are a
number of these AI labs, but OpenAI
because they pioneered the consumerf
facing large language model space that's
chat GPT, the the chat bots that you use
or you'll feed a search query into. Um,
they really cemented themselves as a
very meaningful first mover. And I think
the important thing for all of you to
understand is what this company was at
the beginning that gave it that first
mover advantage.
OpenAI was founded as a nonprofit and at
a time when other for-profit entities
like Google already had a lead, already
had more money, Sam Alman went to Elon
Musk, who now has his own competing
for-profit AI entity, XAI, and said,
"Listen, I see that you're tweeting that
this technology could be more dangerous
than nuclear weapons. I agree. Uh this
is a technology that you know if it
becomes sophisticated enough and it's
like its own competing species and if it
falls out of alignment with its human
creators you could have a Terminator
Skynet science fiction scenario where it
wipes us all out. You know it's
integrated in our financial systems in
our security systems. Um and the risks
are very high. Uh and and by the way, we
can get to this later, but there are
more immediate risks, I think, that are
already playing out and don't require
you to buy into all of that fantastical
high level of risk. On the basis of that
pitch, Musk put in a lot of money. Other
people put in money. This was founded as
a 501c3. People, engineers, the best and
the brightest, took pay cuts to join.
And so the the standard by which Sam
Alman asked to be judged was a scenario
in which there needed to be an elevated
level of integrity that this was a
nonprofit with a board that could fire
any CEO that wasn't trustworthy with
this sacred mission to protect humanity
and the actual structure and uh charter
of the company were all oriented around
we are not here to grow fast. We are
here to do this safely. We will slow
down if we need to to do it safely. We
will throw in our lot with a competitor
even if we have to to do this safely.
And so everything that came after the
questions about integrity, the fact that
colleagues tried to fire Sam Alman uh
over those questions of integrity, uh
it's against this backdrop of a debate
about what the standards should be for
AI. Should it be like any other
technology or should it be something
that's special because of the ways it
affects all of us?
>> Well, what happened to these lofty
ideals? You know, the initial embryionic
stage of open AI, you know, there was a
lot of behindthe-scenes drama. So, how
did it shift from a nonprofit to the
behemoth that is today?
Well, this is where the personality
trait that ultimately led to this
attempt to fire Alman at and he was
indeed fired for a few days before he
was able to undo that. Um, this is where
that trait comes in. We document how in
an early period of the company where Sam
Alman was saying publicly and to
recruits, you know, this is a nonprofit,
that is all it will ever be.
Simultaneously,
the internal communications of this
company show he and his co-founders were
talking about how to get out of that
structure and really aggressively
talking about growth. We have, you know,
a journal entry from uh one of his
co-founders, Greg Brockman, um saying,
you know, okay, what do I want? How do I
get to a billion? Um and even actually
wondering in writing like, is this a lie
that we're saying it's a nonprofit and
then turning around and trying to make
it into something else? Do you think he
was disingenuous from disingenuous
rather from the start? I mean, why and
how did the worm turn or do you think he
never really wanted to have it as a
nonprofit? Ronin,
>> well, I think an important thing for you
all to know as you go into reading this
is this isn't a hit piece where we're
just carrying any old criticism for Sam
Alman. In fact, it it was done with
tremendous sensitivity and even
generosity to to Sam. Um, as with any
complex large-scale investigative story
like this, there's a lot that doesn't
make it into the piece. And over the
course of a lot of intensive
conversations with Sam, I really heard
out any argument he had on any subject.
Was there anything that was going to
feel too sensationalist? I'm at a point
in my career where it is more important
to me for it to feel sober and
even-handed and to note if something is
a criticism that feels like it's being
amplified by competitors with sour
grapes
>> or in headlines for clickbait. Right.
>> Yes. Exactly. Um, which, you know, thank
you all of you for giving this time and
space and taking the time to read it.
It's a long read because, uh, the market
doesn't naturally reward that kind of an
even-handed forensic appraisal. But
that's what we did here. And on the
question of whether this was
disingenuous from the start, because of
that approach, we carry a full range of
interpretations. Um, there's Sam Alman's
defense, which is like, look, I'm just
adapting to changing circumstances. The
race to achieve the next level of
complexity of artificial intelligence
requires an almost unthinkable amount of
capital. I mean it is barely an
exaggeration to say all the money in the
world. Um this is a technology whose
development is just sucking up every
resource you can imagine because of the
way making smarter and smarter models
requires so much hardware power. Um it's
exponential. And Sam says, you know,
look, it became apparent that we needed
more money and so this structure didn't
work anymore. The problem is you then
talk to a lot of the people who were at
this company and they weren't in on that
evolution. They were being told
something different. He was saying
multiple things to different people
sometimes at the same time. And that is
the trend line that we document. Sam
Alman ultimately a few years after the
founding of OpenAI, this was in late
2023,
was fired by board members and
executives who simply felt he was lying
too much. This is an extraordinary
thing, Katie. Silicon Valley is built on
hype, empty promises, right? Valuations
that skyrocket long before there's a
product that actually works for anyone.
This is on such a scale that even with
that baseline expectation where frankly
I think we've entered an era where
people just embrace as a cost of doing
business a degree of dissembling, Sam
Alman appears to have been doing it so
much that it was almost all anyone could
talk about after dealing with him. And
we interview more than 100 people and we
uncover hundreds of pages of internal
records. A majority of those people
really did say some variation on the
theme of he's a pathological liar. that
actually multiple people unprompted by
us used the term sociopath and this is
everything from um very minor things. We
document earlier cases in his career
where also there were efforts to force
him out of jobs amidst allegations of
dishonesty. And at one earlier startup,
you know, he was claiming to everyone he
was a champion ping pong player and then
they played ping pong in the office and
he was one of the worst players in the
office. And and Sam, you know, his
responses on each of these are
documented in the piece. I hope you'll
look. He says on that, I was probably
joking. But then it also extends to
serious cases. you know, before his
firing, there was a situation where he
assured board members that um the most
controversial features of a new model
had been safety tested. Turns out they
hadn't when they looked into that. Um
there was a breach where a new untested
model was leaked into India to the
public and he didn't mention that in
hours of briefing with board members. Um
we talk about how these concerns about
honesty deepened the rift with that
competitor I mentioned, Dario Amade.
There's a moment in this piece where um
there's been an investment uh from
Microsoft. They're doing a big deal with
Microsoft and Sam is assuring Daario
Amade that Microsoft has not inserted
any provisions that override the
company's safety provisions that are in
their own charter. And Sam says this
provision that might threaten the safety
concerns is not there. and Daario
literally points to it and brings in
another colleague to verify that it's
there. And then Sam says, "Oh, well, you
know, sure, but who cares?" There's
another scene amidst their deepening
fights where he calls in Daario and
Daario's sister, Daniela, who also
worked at the company and is also now an
anthropic. And look, they're competitors
now, but at the time they were inside
the company, and this is based on
contemporaneous notes and accounts. Uh,
he said, "You're plotting a coup against
me. I have it on good authority from
this other senior executive. They called
in that senior executive who said, "I
never said that." And then Sam,
according to the accounts we have, said
right there in the room, "Well, I never
made the claim in the first place." And
Daniela said, "You just said it." So
there was this situation where people
really don't feel like they can stand on
firm ground. There's two contingents.
There is a group of people who say this
is just so much lying that it's
dysfunctional for any senior executive
at a major company. And then there are
people who say again AI is special and
in this case it's about more than the
fate of this one company. The whole
economy is wrapped up in it. It has all
of these applications that may affect
all of our lives. We need people who
have an elevated level of integrity and
this in that context is not just
dysfunctional, it could be dangerous.
So, we carry that full range of opinions
as well as Altman's defenses and
explanations about where this trait
comes from.
>> Well, and I want to talk to you a little
bit about his origin story in a minute,
but how was he able to return to power
in less than a week after being fired?
Because I know you open up the piece and
you have this drama, this big dramatic
internal struggle with OpenAI's former
chief scientist, a woman named Ilia
Satskver
>> man. Ilia Satsk,
>> I'm sorry, a man. Sorry, Ilia Scott.
Anyway, so so this was the chief
scientist and he really was kind of
spearheading, right, the effort to get
Altman fired. So he gets fired and then
he comes back in less than a week. How
does he do that?
>> So Ilia, the chief scientist, as you
say, uh is one of these people around
whom we just obtained all of these
documents of what they were writing at
the time. Um, and one of the kind of
fabled documents around this is a set of
memos, around 70 pages of them that he
sent to the board, uh, that helped to
precipitate the firing. It was a straw
that broke the camel's back situation. A
bunch of board members had been through
these interactions where they felt Alman
had concealed things, told people
conflicting stories, been deceptive
about safety standards within the
company. Um but this set of memos which
have not been reviewed in full before
and which we look at and report on here
in a newly detailed way. Um you know
they have right at the beginning uh a a
list that says Sam exhibits a consistent
pattern of and then the first item is
lying. And so you know Sgzgiver was
acting at the behest of board members
who had this mounting concern. It wasn't
just him. Um, others at the company
submitted material, screenshots of Slack
messages and other pieces of evidence
that they felt documented this
persistent troubling pattern. And what's
really interesting is exactly the
question you ask. This incident is one
that we led with because it's not just I
think about Sam Alman. This was a moment
where uh sort of noble-minded people who
really wanted to champion the safety of
this technology and keep things as a
nonprofit ran headlong into the fact
that this was becoming an incredibly
valuable business. And it was a lot of
very junior people on that board, a lot
of people without experience in uh the
cutthroat world of Silicon Valley
politics. And they fell silent. uh they
got what I think a lot of them now
acknowledge to be bad legal advice to
not fully explain the firing other than
they put out a euphemistic statement
saying he wasn't sufficiently candid
>> I remember that
>> we all wondered right and and in Silicon
Valley people wondered so Microsoft
which by then had this you know very
intensive business relationship had
invested a lot in open AI didn't get a
call about it until essentially as it
was happening still even then didn't get
a full explanation so you had all of
these you know, nuts and bolts,
pragmatic investors running around
saying, "What the hell happened?" Uh,
and not getting answers and searching
for overt criminality and not at all
clocking this steady accumulation of
alleged dishonesty and the question of
whether it should matter a in general
and b especially with respect to this
technology. So Sam Alman was able to,
and we tell the whole detailed story of
this from his and other people around
his perspective, get into a war room,
rally all of those investors. There's
some allegations, which you know we
carry his disputing of those that there
were sort of threatening calls made to
opponents. Um, but the the main thing
that happened here is capitalism
prevailed and there were people who
didn't have persuasive arguments being
made to them about the safety concerns.
Um, trumped Trump profit trumped ethics.
>> Yeah. Well, I I think there are critics
in this piece that certainly feel that
way and I think there's a fair case for
it. Uh there is no doubt that the
community of investors around Sam Alman
carried the day and this integral part
of the structure that Sam himself had
set up, right, that you would have a
nonprofit with a board that could remove
a chief executive on the basis of these
kinds of trust issues. um that fell away
and he came back and I do think Katie
that it's it's an inflection point for
the whole industry because it was a the
death of the kind of situation where
such a firing could have even happened
and the fact that it was sort of swept
under the rug. We talk about a law firm
investigation that was actually kept out
of writing. Um no one ever got answers
and everyone just moved on and made a
whole lot of money. Uh and they continue
to. It does speak to the way in which uh
when something is strongly incentivized
by the economics uh the rest of us don't
get the accountability and the oversight
on the safety concerns that could affect
all of us.
>> Yeah. This opens up so many important
questions about AI and regulation and
ethics and um all those things that
we're thinking about as this technology
really starts to take over. I'm curious,
Ron. And by the way, you should turn
this into a book, don't you think?
>> Not a bad idea. There is a lot of
material that did not make it into this
article and it's such a fast moving uh
topic. I I do think
>> Yeah, that's the problem. I that's the
problem. I think when you're writing a
book like this, by the time it's
published, like a lot of this stuff
there, it has to be constantly updated.
But but I I'm curious about his origin
story, right? He comes from a pretty
liberal family from and he was raised in
St. Louis. Is that right?
>> That's right. and um you know so was
there anything in his childhood I'm so
interested in kind of what circumstances
make someone the way they are and and
did you did you discover anything that
would have created a person who has such
a really um challenging relationship
with the truth
>> well you know I approached conversations
with him about this subject exactly the
way you're just describing I was
fascinated I of always feel for someone
when I'm reporting on them and there's
all this criticism of them out there.
And so, you know, we had very bracing
personal conversations where I said,
"Listen, what what is your human
experience of this?" Because for me, if
so many people close to me said, "He
lies all the time." It would be
devastating and it would be cause for a
lot of introspection and work on myself
and trying to
>> and I actually said like what's the
story you tell yourself? How do you deal
with this in therapy? Are you in
therapy? And I think this goes to the
wider question of of where does this
come from? because his answer
um you know I I don't want to
editorialize too much but was not
certainly the answer of someone who has
deeply worked on this in therapy. Um you
know there there was a lot of sort of
west coast platitudes um about you know
I like breath work. I've tried therapy
here and there. Um not a lot of at least
that he was willing to reveal to me. Um
>> what about his parents Roman?
>> His parents are both very wellconed. His
father was a uh worked in real estate
and was a housing rights activist. Um
his mother is a a very well- reggarded
and well-connected uh dermatologist.
They had this you know suburban very
comfortable uh life. Um he went to a
very fancy prep school. Um, I think
further to this, uh, sort of resistance
to too much self-reflection on some of
these topics, when we talked about the
factors in his upbringing that might be
have be formative in retrospect, he was
quick to dismiss them, but also
sometimes would slip in an
acknowledgement that he was dismissing
them uh, too quickly. Uh there's a a
moment in this story where I ask him
about how his sexuality cuz he's he's
gay um might have formed uh any part of
him and might connect even to this trait
because his explanation of this is he's
not denying that there's some truth to
the charge. He is saying uh yes I've had
some problems in this respect. He's
attributing it to being a people pleaser
uh and being conflict avoidant. And I
asked what in his childhood might have
led to that. And at one point he did
say, um, well, I don't think my
sexuality has informed who I am in in
any pertinent way. Uh, there was this
one time when I was, you know, uh,
beaten up. And he essentially described,
you know, a horrific hate crime. We
didn't find any records of this. He
hasn't talked about it before. Um, he
didn't want to get into details about it
on the record, uh, as we say in the
piece. Um, but, you know, he has this
quote where he kind of says both things.
He says, "Uh, well, maybe that led to a
a deep-seated desire to please and fit
in more, um, and not antagonize people.
Uh, but I'm sure not." And, you know,
maybe it's something I just haven't
fully reckoned with. Uh, but I'm sure
not. I'm sure it's nothing.
So doesn't sound like I mean he revealed
much about
or as you said that he's deeply
introspective or has kind of and to your
point like if people said that about
most of us I think we would be comp
devastated right or or you know and
maybe that's part of the
sociopathic
behavior I don't Now
>> I'm you know there there are multiple
people who use this term unprompted in
the piece. I'm always reluctant to I'm
not going to you know armchair
psychologize that specific diagnosis.
And I think the piece reckons with the
fact that especially against this
cutthroat competition to win in AI which
is very often how Alman frames it
himself. Now um there's a lot of sour
grapes. There's a lot of interested
parties who are pushing criticism. So I
really try to fil through that. I I
think on the lack of introspection or
apparent lack of introspection,
one of the the analyses that we get in
this piece is there's a a former board
member um named Sue Yun who's on the
record here talking about working with
Sam and she says, you know, look, there
are these people who say say he's
Makabell and he's sociopathic. Um it's
all this like evil mastermind approach.
Uh, and then there's these people who
say, I mean, really it's very few of
them and it's his his ardent defenders
he sends out, but like he's just a great
businessman and this is a feature, not a
bug. What she describes is a view in
between, which is she says, I think it's
overstated to say he's Mchaveellian. Um,
she uses the term to the point of
fecklessness. He is someone who believes
the shifting realities of his sales
pitches as he's saying them. and she's
one of several people who talked about a
disconnect with reality that is driven
by some version of that trait, a kind of
um prednatural lack of doubt or
reflection.
>> And I think it's interesting to reflect
on how that trait is really rewarded by
capitalism, right? If you look at the
whole Silicon Valley hustle,
>> it's it's very often this shell game,
right, of pumping up a valuation and
getting all this venture capital money
and it's about promises. And we've seen
one story after another where those
bubbles burst. The problem here is that
the bubble is now inshing the entire
global economy.
>> So the stakes are very very high. And
that's where I thought it was worth
spending this much of my life looking at
this particular trustworthy question as
a as a kind of um you know a metaphor
for a much wider question.
>> Does he have any governors around him or
is he really surround himself with
enablers? You know, I think the best
leaders are people who don't surround
themselves with yes men and women,
right? somebody who listens to
criticism, you know. Gosh, I can't help
but think of like what what's happening
in the White House right now when I'm
talking about this, but who listens to
con, you know, conflicting ideas and
criticism and can evaluate things, you
know, taking taking stock of a lot of
opinions and is he it doesn't doesn't
sound to me like he's that kind of guy.
And I just want to pause and comment on
that wider comparison to what's
happening in Washington because the two
entwine, you know, Sam Alman, one of the
many about faces we describe in the
piece is he compared Trump to Hitler. He
was a staunch Democrat. Um, you know,
he's gay, he's Jewish. He talks about
taking from his Jewishness specifically,
um, a fear of autocrats, um, and an
aversion to overconentration of power.
And now he is, you know, perhaps Trump's
favorite tycoon. and you know talks to
him with some regularity uh and more
than that has publicly sung his praises
and you know sits across from him at at
state dinners. And so
this is a situation where the
transformation of Sam Alman has been
embedded by a transformation in America
and in policy. We are living in so many
ways culturally in a post-truth moment
>> and we are living in a moment where the
kinds of guard rails you just asked
about are falling away. writ large. Um,
and the value you talked about of checks
and balances and those of us who try to
be good people and work on ourselves
knowing that you have to have people
around you to tell you no. Um, falling
away. Uh, you know, I in my own work,
I'm sure you have a version of this. I
think about that constantly when I'm
doing work that's this sensitive and has
stakes this high. I I am always thinking
about who do I have in my chain of
command from you know um researchers,
fact checkers, editors who are uh you
know not overly impressed by me and are
going to say
>> and your and your co-au and your co
co-author
>> co-author in this situation you know
people who will form a community around
you and check you when your instincts
are not your best. Um Sam Alman in that
moment of coming back from his firing
and undoing it also undid a lot of those
structures. So one of the things we
document is that he demanded the
resignation of some board members that
had moved to fire him in their place. he
really actively was involved in
selecting replacements and he brought in
Brett Taylor who was formerly a Facebook
executive and Larry Summers who's a name
that some of you in the audience might
know who's a former um treasury
secretary
>> president Harvard and and and featured
featured prominently in the Epstein
files but
>> um he recently stepped down from the
OpenAI board because of extensive
Jeffrey Epstein emails including ones
where he asked Epstein's advice on how
to pursue a romance with a young uh
mentee. Um but prior to that he was seen
as giving credibility to the effort to
bring Sam Alvin back and and both
Summers and Taylor, this other new board
member. Um you know we have the texts of
of Sam and Satia Nadella, the head of
Microsoft basically picking these
people. Um and and actually Taylor had
previously uh not been put on the board
because he was considered too close to
Sam. And what happened was in the place
of the board that could ensure this kind
of accountability, you got two me board
members who exclusively oversaw an
outside law firm investigation where we
report it was it was kept entirely out
of writing. Um, and you know, I'm a
lawyer by training and I had a lot of
very deep conversations with a lot of
lawyers and other figures around this.
Um, and the lawyers who defend this, uh,
their arguments are carried in full. It
is true that in some cases at private
companies um legitimacy restoring
investigations uh are kept out of
writing, but you know the preponderance
of legal analysis here Katie is that if
it's being kept out of writing, it's a
red flag. It's often done to avoid
liability uh and accountability and that
particularly in a case like this where
it wasn't a for-profit company at the
time. It was owned by a nonprofit 501c3
and where the scandal was very public,
which this was. It was the biggest story
in Silicon Valley at the time. Um,
there's a big contingent around it that
I think with some grounds says this was
a whitewash. This defeated the purpose
of an outside investigation that was
supposed to restore trust. So, so all of
the mechanisms that could have been
people to say no, people to ensure
outside accountability,
>> any guard rails, right? a lot of it has
fallen away. Of course, the company
would dispute that and say their board
is more robust and professionalized than
ever. Um, but I do think that was a
significant moment where a lot of the
efforts to keep AI as something that was
governed by more than just economic
incentives uh died.
You know, uh I I know a lot of the
people you spoke to describe him as
uniquely persuasive, able to convince
all these different audiences that, you
know, their goals are the same as his
and he's sounds like he's like a
championship sch smoozer. I met him very
briefly a few years ago. I found him to
be very socially awkward. Um
>> uh I don't know, maybe he was
intimidated by me. Ron,
>> it had that effect on us. Katie,
>> I'm kidding. But I I'm just curious like
did he seem like a confident guy? Was he
did he smoo you? Did he try to work you
over? You know, so much of interviewing
a public figure like this is is
performative, right? I mean, you don't
really quite know. Are you getting the
real person? Are you getting the guy or
person or girl putting on a show, right?
>> Completely. And it's funny that you
frame it in this exact way because I've
had internal conversations with, you
know, my co-author and others in the
editorial process about this very
question. The answer is this is another
one where opinions vary. My mom called
me after reading this piece and said,
you know, well, you know, I watch
interviews with him and I do I just I'm
charmed. he has this sort of boyish
vulnerability and um you know and I read
the piece and I I can't say that I
dislike the guy which by the way I'm
very happy that we constructed a piece
that is so assiduously fair that people
are coming out of it saying everything
from like the facts show that this is a
monster who should be kept away from uh
having a finger on the button to uh I
like the guy. We really try to stick to
the facts. I think my own impression is
I I I find myself recalling the comment
about fecklessness from that former
board member. Uh in many hours of long
conversation,
Sam Alman appeared to just get over his
skis a lot with me. I perceive the same
awkwardness you do, Katie. Um, and I
don't know that it always redounds to
the kind of sympathetic vulnerability in
my experience of it that my mother
talked about. Um, you know, in fairness,
it's a unique context to be dealing with
someone around a story like this. Uh, I,
you know, there's less opportunity for
charm when someone is uh, pushing back.
And look, I won't talk about a lot of
specifics of conversations that aren't
in the piece, but even unground ruled, I
can say there was plenty of contention,
as you might imagine, around a story
like this, and we talk in the piece
about some claims that he can be
retaliatory or have some menace to him.
Um, I certainly saw aspects of Sam uh
that, you know, were not in keeping with
the charming boyish profile. Um, and I I
think that uh I have a lot of sympathy
for anyone who's in a situation like
this where these kinds of documents are
being surfaced, colleagues are saying
these kinds of things and uh you know
therefore I I have a lot of patience for
it. Uh but I would not say that I'm one
of the people who says some of the
things that are said in this piece of
like he's this Jedi of charm offensives.
>> Okay. I I I want to ask you and and then
I really want people to read the piece.
you guys, Ronan and and his co-author. I
want to make sure I get your co-author's
name right.
>> Andrew Morance. Is it Morance or
Morance? How do I say it?
>> Morance. Okay. Uh let's give Andrew some
props here, everybody. But um who worked
alongside uh of Ronin. But um I I want
to just ask you a couple more questions
and then I'm going to really encourage
people to read your excellent piece. But
let's talk about um the whole thing that
happened at the Pentagon cuz honestly I
kind of remember I kind of read about
this but there's so much stuff hitting
us in the face newswise but it was
Anthropic said basically to the Pentagon
we don't feel comfortable with the way
you're using our technology. The guy
who's the head of anthropic who's I saw
he was interviewed by Andrew Ross Sorc
in a dealbook. I'm not sure if you went
to that. You must have watched a video
at some point. He's he's he's very
interesting and was very like jumpy and
anyway kind of like a cat, sort of
skittish. Um but but they pulled out
right uh of the this Pentagon contract
and Open AI was like we have some
ethical concerns but hey we'll do it.
Can you kind of just give us a sense of
what hap what transpired there? Yeah, we
report on this deeply in the piece and
you know I I think I mentioned before
that this is a long read. Block out some
time if you can because we also did
something that is not automatically
rewarded in the current detention
economy and we didn't frontload scoops.
So it is purely narrative and some of
the biggest stuff is towards the end and
and one of those episodes is this
standoff with the Pentagon where you had
a situation where the Trump
administration uh now so-called war
department was seeking to overhaul its
contracts with AI vendors and uh a bunch
of those vendors just went along with
what the Pentagon wanted and Anthropic
which had this unique origin story that
I mentioned earlier right it was formed
by people open AI who were concerned
that Sam Alman was not trustworthy
enough and that the grave safety risks
of this technology were not being
safeguarded. Um and related to that when
it came to the overhauling of these
contracts, Anthropic was at the time the
only vendor within the Pentagon's
classified systems. So they were being
used in critical operations and they did
not want to back down on two red lines.
They didn't want their technology used
uh for mass surveillance domestically
and they didn't want their technology
used for autonomous weapons, weapons
that fire without human operators. And
these are both, you know, very real
concerns. And we talked to a bunch of
the Pentagon officials around this. The
main under secretary who was responsible
for these negotiations, Emil Michael, is
on the record in the piece talking about
it. When the going got tough in the
negotiation with Anthropic, they felt
Anthropic was being slow. They were
pushing back. They didn't want to sign a
blanket assurance that the Pentagon
could do anything it wanted or viewed as
legal. Um, what Emil Michael did was
called Sam Alman and said, "Hey, we're
having these problems with anthropic.
You want to jump in?" And Sam said,
"Yeah, I'm ready to jump in." And what
is interesting about this story is that
it's another case where Sam appears to
have been telling different things to
different groups of people. Um, he was
telling the public, you he went on CNBC
in this period. He was telling his
company in memos and in all hands
meetings, we support Anthropic in this
standoff. Uh, we don't want to do
anything to undermine them. and
simultaneously he was privately
negotiating to swoop in and take their
place. Um, and you know, we carry
OpenAI's responses in this. They
describe it as uh noble that they
thought if they could resolve the
standoff by stepping in, it would spare
some of the negative repercussions for
Anthropic. Obviously, uh, anthropic and
many spectators have disagreed with
that. Um, but the long and short of it
is that you had a situation where Sam
was working against, it seemed, a
competitor that he was simultaneously
claiming to support. And the outcome of
this is also one where we should raise
some of these trustworthiness questions
because Katie, the way that the deal
that Sam Alman and OpenAI ultimately
secured with the Pentagon has been
framed by them is that they solved all
the problems that they got in place
asurances um that these technologies
would not be used in these ways and that
those two red lines that Anthropic cared
about are safeguarded. But the great
>> that
>> well you talk to legal analysts who are
wellversed in this field and they're
really skeptical because basically they
did sign on to the same language
Anthropic didn't want to which is that
the Pentagon can make any lawful use of
this technology and we know from recent
history that things like surveillance
drag nets are uh deemed nominally legal
uh you know by government lawyers and
then undertaken and later there are
questions raised about legality. So, you
know, the piece does not carry water for
anthropic. Uh it carries criticism that
they too are engaged in a race to the
bottom. Um but I think a sadness in this
story is that there is just a shrinking
space for them or for anyone else to
stand their ground. And you know, there
are critics who assert that Sam Alman is
a part of that race to the bottom, a big
catalyst of it.
>> Yeah. Well, that's because he is sort of
the leader of the pack, right? And you
know, I know there were rumors, you
touched on them briefly. And by the way,
anybody asking, you know, you've got
this award-winning journalist here,
everybody. So, if you have any questions
for Ronin about AI, about Sam Alman,
about anything, please put them in the
chat, and I I am here. I am I am your
conduit. I'm your vessel. Anyway, um so
there were a lot of uh insinuations that
he had sexually pursued minors. Um, and
I wondered if you ultimately found they
appear to be untrue, but I wonder if you
had any sympathy because the knives are
out for Sam Alman in an unprecedented
way just by virtue of the fact that he
is in the position he's in. So, so I'm
curious um if you can just speak to that
and how you kind of got to the bottom of
it and and again if you had any sympathy
for him having to deal with some of
these accusations.
>> Absolutely. And I see Sue asking where's
the article available. Um please do uh
go to the new yorker.com and read this
article there in full. uh it is very
hard to actually direct people to the
source of the information. You lose a
lot of nuance when you read like a chat
GPT summary on social media. Um, and
also the entire business model that
allows us to get this kind of detailed
factf finding is dependent on, you know,
read it. There's a few free articles a
month um from the New York support the
New Yorker. I mean, it's one of the
places where just such top top
journalism is done and we have to
support these institutions and these
organizations and companies like the New
Yorker. though and and you guys, you
know, I think about it, Ronan and worked
on it and Andrew for a year and a half.
So, uh, we can give our time to read the
article in full um and and to support
publications like The New Yorker. Okay.
All right. Go on.
>> Yeah. And it it is worth a subscription
and think about other publications that
do careful good work. You know, maybe
that's ProPublica or somewhere else for
you. And just
>> Publica is awesome. The Atlantic is I'm
still a big fan of the New York Times. I
mean, I like The Economist because I
like to get a less, you know, uh, US-
ccentric perspective and the articles
are short.
>> Absolutely. To to all of that, you know,
>> Financial Times. I think I'm going to
get a a a subscription to the Financial
Times, too. But anyway, go ahead. So,
back to
>> and feeling sympathetic. Absolutely.
Yes. Um, you know, one of the ways in
which this piece is over evenhanded
throughout is I was also looking for
things that were not true. Um, and
whether I could knock those down. There
is an astonishing thing happening around
Sam, which is that some of these more
evidence-based critiques comingle very
readily um with things that are
amplified by uh rivals that just don't
seem to have a factual basis. as far as
we found in months of looking. I have
seldom been on a story with such a wild
pivot. I'm looking at these honesty
questions that got him fired. And I
learned that at the time of that firing,
everyone involved in asking questions
about it was also hearing about claims
that he pursues minors. Um I myself in
the course of moving through these
Silicon Valley circles reporting on this
story um you know just getting calls
from figures in this field was just
hearing over and over again this
allegation repeated like it was an
assumed truth and you know Sam readily
admits having had some you know younger
uh partners or younger looking partners
we talked all of the ones we talked to
were of legal age you know and I was But
what about his sister? Like his sister
Annie I mean that's why I mean listen
you've been into this for a year and a
half but his sister Annie uh said that
he or alleged that he sexually abused
her as a child. So like what's that
about?
>> Well one of the things that makes this
difficult to get to the bottom of is
just this ecosystem of rivals amplifying
things. We report on extensive dossas
circulated by Elon Musk's people um
where they're laying out the kitchen
sink of all of these personal
allegations. They're amplifying
everything. They're amplifying the
claims about underage boys. They're
amplifying this allegation from his
sister. They're amplifying uh claims
that he killed a whistleblower. This is
something that Tucker Carlson has
championed. So, there is a lot of
misinformation to cut through. Now,
Annie Alman, Sam's sister, is, you know,
a subject really for its own body of
reporting. Um, it was important to me to
acknowledge it, and I did talk to her
for this story. Um, I'm very moved by
her story. I think it's important to
note that Sam's whole family has denied
this. Um, she is someone who has
acknowledged that these allegations are
based in part on uh memories from early
childhood recovered later in life.
There's a whole body of complex detailed
literature on how that impacts the
credibility of claims um you know not
just blanket uh recovered memories but
early childhood specifically
>> and obviously this is something you know
so much about Ronan
>> so deeply and I know that it requires
great care and sensitivity and I
actually you know made sure that I I
called Annie and said listen I just want
you to know while it is really important
to acknowledge your allegation in this
story. This is not an investigation into
your allegation. I think it's important
to sound notes of skepticism. Um, as I
do around any allegation of this type,
um, that's always been something I've
said. It's something I said about Harvey
Weinstein. It's something I've said, you
know, when my own family has been
affected by allegations of sex crimes.
You want to apply all due skepticism to
the claim. You want to listen closely as
well and not ignore it. So that is
mentioned and it is mentioned that it's
been amplified by um rivals
um and that is a the credibility of that
claim is a complex question that I you
know won't dispose of in a in a quick
answer in an interview like that. Um but
I think that we strike a very careful
balance in the piece in terms of the
treatment of it.
So I want again everyone to read read
your work but sort of a as a closing
question Ronan I'm I'm curious you know
you did this deep deep dive into Sam
Alman's life right you spent a lot of
time with him and as a result I think
you you spent a lot of time really
exploring the world of artificial
intelligence
and and the people who are controlling
it right which is you know this this
technology that is going to be
transformative, but you know, toward the
beginning of our conversation,
you know, can be, you know, could
potentially be incredibly destructive,
right? Um, and so I'm just curious when
all is said and done and you write this
piece and you think about the future and
you think about artificial intelligence,
did you did you leave this whole project
feeling scared shitless or were you
feeling like
this can this this ultimately is going
to be a posit a net positive for the
world? I'm just curious how you kind of
think about this technology now that you
spent all this time in it.
>> I did have to form exactly my opinions
on on what you outline sort of a new cuz
I'm not a beat reporter on the
technology and I was parachuting in. So
I'm something of a pair of fresh eyes
and I took a very evidence-based
approach and I really was able to
immerse myself in deep conversation with
essentially all of the leading
technologists in the field. It is worth
acknowledging that some of the promise
of AI is real and is here that it is
transforming you know uh various forms
of cancer diagnosis. Um
>> no I'm I'm very very excited about AI
and medicine uh but that's you know I'm
I'm worried about it in other arenas.
There's cancer diagnosis. There's
there's drug development. There's uh
early emergency weather warning. There's
practical applications that are are
proving out as real. That is not what
the lion's share of the inflated value
of this technology is driven by. um and
a lot of the utopian promises that Sam
Alman offers. You know, just the day
that this piece launched, he was out
there um you know, making what to many
critics sound like fantastical claims
about how this technology will change
everything and everyone will be able to
uh start their own startup that will
solve all the problems in the world. You
know, and I'm really only lightly
paraphrasing. Um
there are serious technologists that I
spoke to who talk about the upsides that
Sam and some of the other market leaders
promise uh being years away. Um the risk
is that a bubble could collapse before
then and really affect all of us. Um, at
the same time, I also emerge from this
technology
convinced that some of the warnings from
the safety-minded folks that forced out
Sam in the first place are more real
every passing year. You know, that we
have seen uh a rise in the applications
of AI in battlefields. um that we have
already seen what seems to be the first
documented case of uh a drone going
rogue without a human operator. Um that
you know we are seeing already political
disinformation uh being accessible to
basically anyone in a cost-free way. Um
you know there were like roocalls in Joe
Biden's voice happening in the last
election cycle um that may have been
affected. Um, this is going to be a wild
west of uh destruction of intellectual
property structures that protect
creators, um, new warfare applications
including chemical weapons, uh,
political disinformation and exposure to
massive economic costs. I was going to
say the job market, you know, I think
that that I don't think our leaders in
Washington or elsewhere have any idea
how to make this transition in terms of
what it's going to do to jobs and you
know how it's going to change the way we
live and work and exist, right?
And and part of the problem here is the
the transformation that we document in
this piece with Sam Alman from a kind of
doomsayer and a safetyist to a no
holdsbred accelerationist is also
happening in the wider policy
environment. So the kinds of steps that
we could apply the kinds of policy moves
that we know can work from looking back
to the history of the industrial
revolution you know reskilling people
subsidies for workers who lose jobs.
these kinds of measures are just not
being put in place and any effort to
slow the technology, create in
international consortiums that might
cooperate around the technology, um it's
all falling away. Anyone in Washington
who invokes the well, we've got to go
fast to beat China on AI prevails in
every argument now. And you know there
obviously there are people who would
dispute this who defend the kind of
accelerationist tendencies and say it's
plenty of regulation already. But I
think there is a really valid critique
that we document in the piece that
meaningful regulation is not coming. I
do not emerge from this reporting
feeling it's net positive at this point
in time and I think the dangers are real
and I think we have all got to engage
with our representatives in Washington
about this. There are simple steps. You
know, in Europe, they have more
mandatory pre-eployment safety testing
for new models. Um, there could be
written public records requirements for
internal investigations of executives at
companies whose products have these
public safety stakes to prevent the kind
of thing we saw with this investigation
at OpenAI. Um, there could be a more
robust national security review of AI
infrastructure being built in
autocracies, particularly autocracies
that have leaked American technology to
China. This is a big part of the piece.
Sam Alman has pushed very aggressively
to get Middle Eastern money for more and
more infrastructure being put in that
part of the world, including in UAE,
where data centers are they're exposed
to conflict. There's grave concerns
about leaks to China. Um, this is all
feeling very much like a runaway train
and we are in a moment where the
legislative branch is severely
disempowered, but those guys still care
about votes. And I think if we all stay
attentive and we keep trying to get good
strong information on this and we stay
in touch with people in Washington and
push them and force them to be engaged
on this uh and not just be cheerleaders,
there's a chance at getting more
meaningful regulation in place. The
fears that we feel in this piece are are
often from people who think that
incentive will only fully fall in place
when something really bad happens. And I
just hope we can head that off.
Yeah, seriously.
>> So many reasons to call the so many
reasons to call the Capitol Hill
switchboard at 20224
3121. Everyone, I have that memorized
from my days in Washington cuz I I would
always call the switchboard to get to
various offices. But, you know, I want
to be uh mindful and and then I promise
I'm going to let you go and I have to go
too, Ronan. But Gretchen asks, and since
I encourage people to ask questions in
the chat, how much of Peter Teal's
influence affected Sam Alman?
>> Oh, it's it's a significant
relationship. Um, you know, he we talk
about him meeting his husband in um a
hot tub at Peter Teals. Um there is a
small community of insiders in this
business. Peter Teal's tendrils are all
over Silicon Valley and now all over
politics. Um,
>> right. Well, he's he's he's the one that
uh really pushed for JD Vance, right?
>> Yeah. Yeah. And and is espousing some
frankly radical and anti-democratic
ideologies and really uh funding
structures to make those ideologies a
reality. So, that's something everyone
should be aware of. Um, you know, I've
engaged with Teal across various stories
and uh I think we need to be watchful, I
would say, writ large about the power
brokers in Silicon Valley and the way
they're flooding Washington with money.
Um, AI is a great example of this. All
of those questions about regulation that
we just talked about are directly
affected by these tycoons
just flooding politics with money. Um
Sam Alman's co-founder, Greg Brockman,
uh gave millions and millions of dollars
to a pack that is designed to knock down
AI regulation. Um, if you are a
candidate running for office in this
country right now, you are probably
going to be on the hook
trying to navigate so much of the money
being from these AI companies because so
much of the economy is from it. So, you
really need to look as you vote for
candidates at whether they are
independent and stand up to Silicon
Valley.
>> On that note, Ronan Pharaoh, Ronan, so
great to see you. Thank you so much for
doing this with me. I know it was kind
of a lastm minute uh arrangement, but
I'm really grateful. And again,
everyone, please read Ronan's latest
piece in the New Yorker and and support
the work of the New Yorker. And uh Ronin
is also now on Substack and he's going
to be he's going to be uh using that. So
follow him on Substack.
>> Brand new. I literally made the account
today, but also have been just stating a
strategy to get you guys good
information directly through this
platform. I'm so encouraged by seeing
all of the productive discourse and
questions here in the chat and this is
kind of my first spin and I'm going to
rely on Katie for some mentorship. I
really love
>> I'm going I'm going to have lunch with
Ronin and he can pick my little brain.
Meanwhile, I think I learned 12 new
vocabulary words, Ronin, in the course
of this conversation. Um, thank you so
much again and everyone who joined us. I
really appreciate you being here. Uh, as
I said, follow Ronin and I'll see you
tomorrow. We're doing a Substack show
tomorrow. Uh, and we've got some
terrific guests, including a former FBI
agent, uh, who's high up in the FBI,
very concerned about terrorism and the
threat of terrorism and the leadership,
current leadership at the FBI. Just
something else to be worried about. Hey,
come to me to just increase your anxiety
level. That's what I'm really good at.
Anyway, Ronan, thanks a lot. Talk to you
soon. Okay, bye everyone.
>> Bye everyone.
